Project Gutenberg's Botchan (Master Darling), by Kin-nosuke Natsume
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Title: Botchan (Master Darling)
Author: Kin-nosuke Natsume
Translator: Yasotaro Morri
Posting Date: October 14, 2012 [EBook #8868]
Release Date: September, 2005
First Posted: August 17, 2003
Language: English
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOTCHAN (MASTER DARLING) ***
Produced by David Starner and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
BOTCHAN (MASTER DARLING)
By The Late Mr. Kin-nosuke Natsume
TRANSLATED By Yasotaro Morri
Revised by J. R. KENNEDY
1919
A NOTE BY THE TRANSLATOR
No translation can expect to equal, much less to excel, the original.
The excellence of a translation can only be judged by noting how far it
has succeeded in reproducing the original tone, colors, style, the
delicacy of sentiment, the force of inert strength, the peculiar
expressions native to the language with which the original is written,
or whatever is its marked characteristic. The ablest can do no more, and
to want more than this will be demanding something impossible. Strictly
speaking, the only way one can derive full benefit or enjoyment from a
foreign work is to read the original, for any intelligence at
second-hand never gives the kind of satisfaction which is possible only
through the direct touch with the original. Even in the best translated
work is probably wanted the subtle vitality natural to the original
language, for it defies an attempt, however elaborate, to transmit all
there is in the original. Correctness of diction may be there, but
spontaneity is gone; it cannot be helped.
The task of the translator becomes doubly hazardous in case of
translating a European language into Japanese, or vice versa. Between
any of the European languages and Japanese there is no visible kinship
in word-form, significance, grammatical system, rhetorical arrangements.
It may be said that the inspiration of the two languages is totally
different. A want of similarity of customs, habits, traditions, national
sentiments and traits makes the work of translation all the more
difficult. A novel written in Japanese which had attained national
popularity might, when rendered into English, lose its captivating
vividness, alluring interest and lasting appeal to the reader.
These remarks are made not in way of excuse for any faulty dictions that
may be found in the following pages. Neither are they made out of
personal modesty nor of a desire to add undue weight to the present
work. They are made in the hope that whoever is good enough to go
through the present translation will remember, before he may venture to
make criticisms, the kind and extent of difficulties besetting him in
his attempts so as not to judge the merit of the original by this
translation. Nothing would afford the translator a greater pain than any
unfavorable comment on the original based upon this translation. If
there be any deserving merits in the following pages the credit is due
to the original. Any fault found in its interpretation or in the English
version, the whole responsibility is on the translator.
For the benefit of those who may not know the original, it must be
stated that "Botchan" by the late Mr. K. Natsume was an epoch-making
piece of work. On its first appearance, Mr. Natsume's place and name as
the foremost in the new literary school were firmly established. He had
written many other novels of more serious intent, of heavier thoughts
and of more enduring merits, but it was this "Botchan" that secured him
the lasting fame. Its quaint style, dash and vigor in its narration
appealed to the public who had become somewhat tired of the stereotyped
sort of manner with which all stories had come to be handled.
In its simplest understanding, "Botchan" may be taken as an episode in
the life of a son born in Tokyo, hot-blooded, simple-hearted, pure as
crystal and sturdy as a towering rock, honest and straight to a fault,
intolerant of the least injustice and a volunteer ever ready to champion
what he considers right and good. Children may read it as a "story of
man who tried to be honest." It is a light, amusing and, at the name
time, instructive story, with no tangle of love affairs, no scheme of
blood-curdling scenes or nothing startling or sensational in the plot or
characters. The story, however, may be regarded as a biting sarcasm on a
hypocritical society in which a gang of instructors of dark character at
a middle school in a backwoods town plays a prominent part. The hero of
the story is made a victim of their annoying intrigues, but finally
comes out triumphant by smashing the petty red tapism, knocking down the
sham pretentions and by actual use of the fist on the Head Instructor
and his henchman.
The story will be found equally entertaining as a means of studying the
peculiar traits of the native of Tokyo which are characterised by their
quick temper, dashing spirit, generosity and by their readiness to
resist even the lordly personage if convinced of their own justness, or
to kneel down even to a child if they acknowledge their own wrong.
Incidently the touching devotion of the old maid servant Kiyo to the
hero will prove a standing reproach to the inconstant, unfaithful
servants of which the number is ever increasing these days in Tokyo. The
story becomes doubly interesting by the fact that Mr. K. Natsume, when
quite young, held a position of teacher of English at a middle school
somewhere about the same part of the country described in the story,
while he himself was born and brought up in Tokyo.
It may be added that the original is written in an autobiographical
style. It is profusely interladed with spicy, catchy colloquials patent
to the people of Tokyo for the equals of which we may look to the
rattling speeches of notorious Chuck Conners of the Bowery of New York.
It should be frankly stated that much difficulty was experienced in
getting the corresponding terms in English for those catchy expressions.
Strictly speaking, some of them have no English equivalents. Care has
been exercised to select what has been thought most appropriate in the
judgment or the translator in converting those expressions into English
but some of them might provoke disapproval from those of the "cultured"
class with "refined" ears. The slangs in English in this translation
were taken from an American magazine of world-wide reputation editor of
which was not afraid to print of "damn" when necessary, by scorning the
timid, conventional way of putting it as "d--n." If the propriety of
printing such short ugly words be questioned, the translator is sorry to
say that no means now exists of directly bringing him to account for he
met untimely death on board the Lusitania when it was sunk by the German
submarine.
Thanks are due to Mr. J. R. Kennedy, General Manager, and Mr. Henry
Satoh, Editor-in-Chief, both of the Kokusai Tsushin-sha (the
International News Agency) of Tokyo and a host of personal friends of
the translator whose untiring assistance and kind suggestions have made
the present translation possible. Without their sympathetic interests,
this translation may not have seen the daylight.
Tokyo, September, 1918.
BOTCHAN (MASTER DARLING)
CHAPTER I
Because of an hereditary recklessness, I have been playing always a
losing game since my childhood. During my grammar school days, I was
once laid up for about a week by jumping from the second story of the
school building. Some may ask why I committed such a rash act. There was
no particular reason for doing such a thing except I happened to be
looking out into the yard from the second floor of the newly-built
school house, when one of my classmates, joking, shouted at me; "Say,
you big bluff, I'll bet you can't jump down from there! O, you
chicken-heart, ha, ha!" So I jumped down. The janitor of the school had
to carry me home on his back, and when my father saw me, he yelled
derisively, "What a fellow you are to go and get your bones dislocated
by jumping only from a second story!"
"I'll see I don't get dislocated next time," I answered.
One of my relatives once presented me with a pen-knife. I was showing it
to my friends, reflecting its pretty blades against the rays of the sun,
when one of them chimed in that the blades gleamed all right, but seemed
rather dull for cutting with.
"Rather dull? See if they don't cut!" I retorted.
"Cut your finger, then," he challenged. And with "Finger nothing! Here
goes!" I cut my thumb slant-wise. Fortunately the knife was small and
the bone of the thumb hard enough, so the thumb is still there, but the
scar will be there until my death.
About twenty steps to the east edge of our garden, there was a
moderate-sized vegetable yard, rising toward the south, and in the
centre of which stood a chestnut tree which was dearer to me than life.
In the season when the chestnuts were ripe, I used to slip out of the
house from the back door early in the morning to pick up the chestnuts
which had fallen during the night, and eat them at the school. On the
west side of the vegetable yard was the adjoining garden of a pawn shop
called Yamashiro-ya. This shopkeeper's son was a boy about 13 or 14
years old named Kantaro. Kantaro was, it happens, a mollycoddle.
Nevertheless he had the temerity to come over the fence to our yard and
steal my chestnuts.
One certain evening I hid myself behind a folding-gate of the fence and
caught him in the act. Having his retreat cut off he grappled with me in
desperation. He was about two years older than I, and, though
weak-kneed, was physically the stronger. While I wallopped him, he
pushed his head against my breast and by chance it slipped inside my
sleeve. As this hindered the free action of my arm, I tried to shake him
loose, though, his head dangled the further inside, and being no longer
able to stand the stifling combat, he bit my bare arm. It was painful. I
held him fast against the fence, and by a dexterous foot twist sent him
down flat on his back. Kantaro broke the fence and as the ground
belonging to Yamashiro-ya was about six feet lower than the vegetable
yard, he fell headlong to his own territory with a thud. As he rolled
off he tore away the sleeve in which his head had been enwrapped, and my
arm recovered a sudden freedom of movement. That night when my mother
went to Yamashiro-ya to apologize, she brought back that sleeve.
Besides the above, I did many other mischiefs. With Kaneko of a
carpenter shop and Kaku of a fishmarket, I once ruined a carrot patch of
one Mosaku. The sprouts were just shooting out and the patch was covered
with straws to ensure their even healthy growth. Upon this straw-covered
patch, we three wrestled for fully half a day, and consequently
thoroughly smashed all the sprouts. Also I once filled up a well which
watered some rice fields owned by one Furukawa, and he followed me with
kicks. The well was so devised that from a large bamboo pole, sunk deep
into the ground, the water issued and irrigated the rice fields.
Ignorant of the mechanical side of this irrigating method at that time,
I stuffed the bamboo pole with stones and sticks, and satisfied that no
more water came up, I returned home and was eating supper when Furukawa,
fiery red with anger, burst into our house with howling protests. I
believe the affair was settled on our paying for the damage.
Father did not like me in the least, and mother always sided with my big
brother. This brother's face was palish white, and he had a fondness for
taking the part of an actress at the theatre.
"This fellow will never amount to much," father used to remark when
he saw me.
"He's so reckless that I worry about his future," I often heard mother
say of me. Exactly; I have never amounted to much. I am just as you see
me; no wonder my future used to cause anxiety to my mother. I am living
without becoming but a jailbird.
Two or three days previous to my mother's death, I took it into my head
to turn a somersault in the kitchen, and painfully hit my ribs against
the corner of the stove. Mother was very angry at this and told me not
to show my face again, so I went to a relative to stay with. While
there, I received the news that my mother's illness had become very
serious, and that after all efforts for her recovery, she was dead. I
came home thinking that I should have behaved better if I had known the
conditions were so serious as that. Then that big brother of mine
denounced me as wanting in filial piety, and that I had caused her
untimely death. Mortified at this, I slapped his face, and thereupon
received a sound scolding from father.
After the death of mother, I lived with father and brother. Father did
nothing, and always said "You're no good" to my face. What he meant by
"no good" I am yet to understand. A funny dad he was. My brother was to
be seen studying English hard, saying that he was going to be a
businessman. He was like a girl by nature, and so "sassy" that we two
were never on good terms, and had to fight it out about once every ten
days. When we played a chess game one day, he placed a chessman as a
"waiter,"--a cowardly tactic this,--and had hearty laugh on me by seeing
me in a fix. His manner was so trying that time that I banged a chessman
on his forehead which was injured a little bit and bled. He told all
about this to father, who said he would disinherit me.
Then I gave up myself for lost, and expected to be really disinherited.
But our maid Kiyo, who had been with us for ten years or so, interceded
on my behalf, and tearfully apologized for me, and by her appeal my
father's wrath was softened. I did not regard him, however, as one to be
afraid of in any way, but rather felt sorry for our Kiyo. I had heard
that Kiyo was of a decent, well-to-do family, but being driven to
poverty at the time of the Restoration, had to work as a servant. So she
was an old woman by this time. This old woman,--by what affinity, as
the Buddhists say, I don't know,--loved me a great deal. Strange,
indeed! She was almost blindly fond of me,--me, whom mother, became
thoroughly disgusted with three days before her death; whom father
considered a most aggravating proposition all the year round, and whom
the neighbors cordially hated as the local bully among the youngsters. I
had long reconciled myself to the fact that my nature was far from being
attractive to others, and so didn't mind if I were treated as a piece of
wood; so I thought it uncommon that Kiyo should pet me like that.
Sometimes in the kitchen, when there was nobody around, she would praise
me saying that I was straightforward and of a good disposition. What she
meant by that exactly, was not clear to me, however. If I were of so
good a nature as she said, I imagined those other than Kiyo should
accord me a better treatment. So whenever Kiyo said to me anything of
the kind, I used to answer that I did not like passing compliments. Then
she would remark; "That's the very reason I say you are of a good
disposition," and would gaze at me with absorbing tenderness. She seemed
to recreate me by her own imagination, and was proud of the fact. I felt
even chilled through my marrow at her constant attention to me.
After my mother was dead, Kiyo loved me still more. In my simple
reasoning, I wondered why she had taken such a fancy to me. Sometimes I
thought it quite futile on her part, that she had better quit that sort
of thing, which was bad for her. But she loved me just the same. Once
in, a while she would buy, out of her own pocket, some cakes or
sweetmeats for me. When the night was cold, she would secretly buy some
noodle powder, and bring all unawares hot noodle gruel to my bed; or
sometimes she would even buy a bowl of steaming noodles from the
peddler. Not only with edibles, but she was generous alike with socks,
pencils, note books, etc. And she even furnished me,--this happened some
time later,--with about three yen, I did not ask her for the money; she
offered it from her own good will by bringing it to my room, saying that
I might be in need of some cash. This, of course, embarrassed me, but as
she was so insistent I consented to borrow it. I confess I was really
glad of the money. I put it in a bag, and carried it in my pocket. While
about the house, I happened to drop the bag into a cesspool. Helpless, I
told Kiyo how I had lost the money, and at once she fetched a bamboo
stick, and said she will get it for me. After a while I heard a
splashing sound of water about our family well, and going there, saw
Kiyo washing the bag strung on the end of the stick. I opened the bag
and found the edict of the three one-yen bills turned to faint yellow
and designs fading. Kiyo dried them at an open fire and handed them over
to me, asking if they were all right. I smelled them and said; "They
stink yet."
"Give them to me; I'll get them changed." She took those three bills,
and,--I do not know how she went about it,--brought three yen in silver.
I forget now upon what I spent the three yen. "I'll pay you back soon,"
I said at the time, but didn't. I could not now pay it back even if I
wished to do so with ten times the amount.
When Kiyo gave me anything she did so always when both father and
brother were out. Many things I do not like, but what I most detest is
the monopolizing of favors behind some one else's back. Bad as my
relations were with my brother, still I did not feel justified in
accepting candies or color-pencils from Kiyo without my brother's
knowledge. "Why do you give those things only to me and not to my
brother also?" I asked her once, and she answered quite unconcernedly
that my brother may be left to himself as his father bought him
everything. That was partiality; father was obstinate, but I am sure he
was not a man who would indulge in favoritism. To Kiyo, however, he
might have looked that way. There is no doubt that Kiyo was blind to the
extent of her undue indulgence with me. She was said to have come from a
well-to-do family, but the poor soul was uneducated, and it could not be
helped. All the same, you cannot tell how prejudice will drive one to
the extremes. Kiyo seemed quite sure that some day I would achieve high
position in society and become famous. Equally she was sure that my
brother, who was spending his hours studiously, was only good for his
white skin, and would stand no show in the future. Nothing can beat an
old woman for this sort of thing, I tell you. She firmly believed that
whoever she liked would become famous, while whoever she hated would
not. I did not have at that time any particular object in my life. But
the persistency with which Kiyo declared that I would be a great man
some day, made me speculate myself that after all I might become one.
How absurd it seems to me now when I recall those days. I asked her once
what kind of a man I should be, but she seemed to have formed no
concrete idea as to that; only she said that I was sure to live in a
house with grand entrance hall, and ride in a private rikisha.
And Kiyo seemed to have decided for herself to live with me when I
became independent and occupy my own house. "Please let me live with
you,"--she repeatedly asked of me. Feeling somewhat that I should
eventually be able to own a house, I answered her "Yes," as far as such
an answer went. This woman, by the way, was strongly imaginative. She
questioned me what place I liked,--Kojimachi-ku or Azabu-ku?--and
suggested that I should have a swing in our garden, that one room be
enough for European style, etc., planning everything to suit her own
fancy. I did not then care a straw for anything like a house; so neither
Japanese nor European style was much of use to me, and I told her to
that effect. Then she would praise me as uncovetous and clean of heart.
Whatever I said, she had praise for me.
I lived, after the death of mother, in this fashion for five or six
years. I had kicks from father, had rows with brother, and had candies
and praise from Kiyo. I cared for nothing more; I thought this was
enough. I imagined all other boys were leading about the same kind of
life. As Kiyo frequently told me, however, that I was to be pitied, and
was unfortunate, I imagined that that might be so. There was nothing
that particularly worried me except that father was too tight with my
pocket money, and this was rather hard on me.
In January of the 6th year after mother's death, father died of
apoplexy. In April of the same year, I graduated from a middle school,
and two months later, my brother graduated from a business college. Soon
he obtained a job in the Kyushu branch of a certain firm and had to go
there, while I had to remain in Tokyo and continue my study. He proposed
the sale of our house and the realization of our property, to which I
answered "Just as you like it." I had no intention of depending upon him
anyway. Even were he to look after me, I was sure of his starting
something which would eventually end in a smash-up as we were prone to
quarrel on the least pretext. It was because in order to receive his
protection that I should have to bow before such a fellow, that I
resolved that I would live by myself even if I had to do milk delivery.
Shortly afterwards he sent for a second-hand dealer and sold for a song
all the bric-a-bric which had been handed down from ages ago in our
family. Our house and lot were sold, through the efforts of a middleman
to a wealthy person. This transaction seemed to have netted a goodly sum
to him, but I know nothing as to the detail.
For one month previous to this, I had been rooming in a boarding house
in Kanda-ku, pending a decision as to my future course. Kiyo was greatly
grieved to see the house in which she had lived so many years change
ownership, but she was helpless in the matter.
"If you were a little older, you might have inherited this house," she
once remarked in earnest.
If I could have inherited the house through being a little older, I
ought to have been able to inherit the house right then. She knew
nothing, and believed the lack of age only prevented my coming into the
possession of the house.
Thus I parted from my brother, but the disposal of Kiyo was a difficult
proposition. My brother was, of course, unable to take her along, nor
was there any danger of her following him so far away as Kyushu, while I
was in a small room of a boarding house, and might have to clear out
anytime at that. There was no way out, so I asked her if she intended to
work somewhere else. Finally she answered me definitely that she would
go to her nephew's and wait until I started my own house and get
married. This nephew was a clerk in the Court of Justice, and being
fairly well off, had invited Kiyo before more than once to come and live
with him, but Kiyo preferred to stay with us, even as a servant, since
she had become well used to our family. But now I think she thought it
better to go over to her nephew than to start a new life as servant in a
strange house. Be that as it may, she advised me to have my own
household soon, or get married, so she would come and help me in
housekeeping. I believe she liked me more than she did her own kin.
My brother came to me, two days previous to his departure for Kyushu,
and giving me 600 yen, said that I might begin a business with it, or go
ahead with my study, or spend it in any way I liked, but that that would
be the last he could spare. It was a commendable act for my brother.
What! about only 600 yen! I could get along without it, I thought, but
as this unusually simple manner appealed to me, I accepted the offer
with thanks. Then he produced 50 yen, requesting me to give it to Kiyo
next time I saw her, which I readily complied with. Two days after, I
saw him off at the Shimbashi Station, and have not set my eyes on him
ever since.
Lying in my bed, I meditated on the best way to spend that 600 yen. A
business is fraught with too much trouble, and besides it was not my
calling. Moreover with only 600 yen no one could open a business worth
the name. Were I even able to do it, I was far from being educated, and
after all, would lose it. Better let investments alone, but study more
with the money. Dividing the 600 yen into three, and by spending 200 yen
a year, I could study for three years. If I kept at one study with
bull-dog tenacity for three years, I should be able to learn something.
Then the selection of a school was the next problem. By nature, there is
no branch of study whatever which appeals to my taste. Nix on languages
or literature! The new poetry was all Greek to me; I could not make out
one single line of twenty. Since I detested every kind of study, any
kind of study should have been the same to me. Thinking thus, I happened
to pass front of a school of physics, and seeing a sign posted for the
admittance of more students, I thought this might be a kind of
"affinity," and having asked for the prospectus, at once filed my
application for entrance. When I think of it now, it was a blunder due
to my hereditary recklessness.
For three years I studied about as diligently as ordinary fellows, but
not being of a particularly brilliant quality, my standing in the class
was easier to find by looking up from the bottom. Strange, isn't it,
that when three years were over, I graduated? I had to laugh at myself,
but there being no reason for complaint, I passed out.
Eight days after my graduation, the principal of the school asked me to
come over and see him. I wondered what he wanted, and went. A middle
school in Shikoku was in need of a teacher of mathematics for forty yen
a month, and he sounded me to see if I would take it. I had studied for
three years, but to tell the truth, I had no intention of either
teaching or going to the country. Having nothing in sight, however,
except teaching, I readily accepted the offer. This too was a blunder
due to hereditary recklessness.
I accepted the position, and so must go there. The three years of my
school life I had seen confined in a small room, but with no kick coming
or having no rough house. It was a comparatively easy going period in my
life. But now I had to pack up. Once I went to Kamakura on a picnic with
my classmates while I was in the grammar school, and that was the first
and last, so far, that I stepped outside of Tokyo since I could
remember. This time I must go darn far away, that it beats Kamakura by a
mile. The prospective town is situated on the coast, and looked the size
of a needle-point on the map. It would not be much to look at anyway. I
knew nothing about the place or the people there. It did not worry me or
cause any anxiety. I had simply to travel there and that was the
annoying part.
Once in a while, since our house was no more, I went to Kiyo's
nephew's to see her. Her nephew was unusually good-natured, and
whenever I called upon her, he treated me well if he happened to be at
home. Kiyo would boost me sky-high to her nephew right to my face. She
went so far once as to say that when I had graduated from school, I
would purchase a house somewhere in Kojimachi-ku and get a position in
a government office. She decided everything in her own way, and talked
of it aloud, and I was made an unwilling and bashful listener. I do
not know how her nephew weighed her tales of self-indulgence on me.
Kiyo was a woman of the old type, and seemed, as if it was still the
days of Feudal Lords, to regard her nephew equally under obligation to
me even as she was herself.
After settling about my new position, I called upon her three days
previous to my departure. She was sick abed in a small room, but, on
seeing me she got up and immediately inquired;
"Master Darling, when do you begin housekeeping?"
She evidently thought as soon as a fellow finishes school, money comes
to his pocket by itself. But then how absurd to call such a "great man"
"Darling." I told her simply that I should let the house proposition go
for some time, as I had to go to the country. She looked greatly
disappointed, and blankly smoothed her gray-haired sidelocks. I felt
sorry for her, and said comfortingly; "I am going away but will come
back soon. I'll return in the vacation next summer, sure." Still as she
appeared not fully satisfied, I added;
"Will bring you back a surprise. What do you like?"
She wished to eat "sasa-ame"[1] of Echigo province. I had never heard of
"sasa-ame" of Echigo. To begin with, the location is entirely different.
[Footnote 1: Sasa-ame is a kind of rice-jelly wrapped with sasa, or the
bamboo leaves, well-known as a product of Echigo province.]
"There seems to be no 'sasa-ame' in the country where I'm going," I
explained, and she rejoined; "Then, in what direction?" I answered
"westward" and she came back with "Is it on the other side of Hakone?"
This give-and-take conversation proved too much for me.
On the day of my departure, she came to my room early in the morning and
helped me to pack up. She put into my carpet-bag tooth powder,
tooth-brush and towels which she said she had bought at a dry goods
store on her way. I protested that I did not want them, but she was
insistent.[A] We rode in rikishas to the station. Coming up the
platform, she gazed at me from outside the car, and said in a low voice;
"This may be our last good-by. Take care of yourself."
Her eyes were full of tears. I did not cry, but was almost going to.
After the train had run some distance, thinking it would be all right
now, I poked my head out of the window and looked back. She was still
there. She looked very small.
CHAPTER II.
With a long, sonorous whistle the steamer which I was aboard came to a
standstill, and a boat was seen making toward us from the shore. The man
rowing the boat was stark naked, except for a piece of red cloth girt
round his loins. A barbarous place, this! though he may have been
excused for it in such hot weather as it was. The sun's rays were strong
and the water glimmered in such strange colors as to dazzle one's sight
if gazed at it for long. I had been told by a clerk of the ship that I
was to get off here. The place looked like a fishing village about the
size of Omori. Great Scott! I wouldn't stay in such a hole, I thought,
but I had to get out. So, down I jumped first into the boat, and I think
five or six others followed me. After loading about four large boxes
besides, the red-cloth rowed us ashore. When the boat struck the sand, I
was again the first to jump out, and right away I accosted a skinny
urchin standing nearby, asking him where the middle school was. The kid
answered blankly that he did not know. Confound the dull-head! Not to
know where the middle school was, living in such a tiny bit of a town.
Then a man wearing a rig with short, queer shaped sleeves approached me
and bade me follow. I walked after him and was taken to an inn called
Minato-ya. The maids of the inn, who gave me a disagreeable impression,
chorused at sight of me; "Please step inside." This discouraged me in
proceeding further, and I asked them, standing at the door-way, to show
me the middle school. On being told that the middle school was about
four miles away by rail, I became still more discouraged at putting up
there. I snatched my two valises from the man with queer-shaped [B]
sleeves who had guided me so far, and strode away. The people of the inn
looked after me with a dazed expression.
The station was easily found, and a ticket bought without any fuss. The
coach I got in was about as dignified as a match-box. The train rambled
on for about five minutes, and then I had to get off. No wonder the fare
was cheap; it cost only three sen. I then hired a rikisha and arrived at
the middle school, but school was already over and nobody was there. The
teacher on night-duty was out just for a while, said the janitor,--the
night-watch was taking life easy, sure. I thought of visiting the
principal, but being tired, ordered the rikishaman to take me to a
hotel. He did this with much alacrity and led me to a hotel called
Yamashiro-ya. I felt it rather amusing to find the name Yamashiro-ya the
same as that of Kantaro's house.
They ushered me to a dark room below the stairway. No one could stay in
such a hot place! I said I did not like such a warm room, but the maid
dumped my valises on the floor and left me, mumbling that all the other
rooms were occupied. So I took the room though it took some resolution
to stand the weltering heat. After a while the maid said the bath was
ready, and I took one: On my way back from the bathroom, I peeped about,
and found many rooms, which looked much cooler than mine, vacant.
Sunnovagun! They had lied. By'm-by, she fetched my supper. Although the
room was hot, the meal was a deal better than the kind I used to have in
my boarding house. While waiting on me, she questioned me where I was
from, and I said, "from Tokyo." Then she asked; "Isn't Tokyo a nice
place?" and I shot back, "Bet 'tis." About the time the maid had reached
the kitchen, loud laughs were heard. There was nothing doing, so I went
to bed, but could not sleep. Not only was it hot, but noisy,--about five
times noisier than my boarding house. While snoozing, I dreamed of Kiyo.
She was eating "sasa-ame" of Echigo province without taking off the
wrapper of bamboo leaves. I tried to stop her, saying bamboo leaves may
do her harm, but she replied, "O, no, these leaves are very helpful for
the health," and ate them with much relish. Astounded, I laughed "Ha,
ha, ha!"--and so awoke. The maid was opening the outside shutters. The
weather was just as clear as the previous day.
I had heard once before that when travelling, one should give "tea
money" to the hotel or inn where he stops; that unless this "tea
money" is given, the hostelry would accord him rather rough treatment.
It must have been on account of my being slow in the fork over of this
"tea money" that they had huddled me into such a narrow, dark room.
Likewise my shabby clothes and the carpet bags and satin umbrella must
have been accountable for it. Took me for a piker, eh? those hayseeds!
I would give them a knocker with "tea money." I left Tokyo with about
30 yen in my pocket, which remained from my school expenses. Taking
off the railway and steamship fare, and other incidental expenses, I
had still about 14 yen in my pocket. I could give them all I
had;--what did I care, I was going to get a salary now. All country
folk are tight-wads, and one 5-yen bill would hit them square. Now
watch and see. Having washed myself, I returned to my room and waited,
and the maid of the night before brought in my breakfast. Waiting on
me with a tray, she looked at me with a sort of sulphuric smile. Rude!
Is any parade marching on my face? I should say. Even my face is far
better than that of the maid. I intended of giving "tea money" after
breakfast, but I became disgusted, and taking out one 5-yen bill told
her to take it to the office later. The face of the maid became then
shy and awkward. After the meal, I left for the school. The maid did
not have my shoes polished.
I had had vague idea of the direction of the school as I rode to it the
previous day, so turning two or three corners, I came to the front gate.
From the gate to the entrance the walk was paved with granite. When I
had passed to the entrance in the rikisha, this walk made so
outlandishly a loud noise that I had felt coy. On my way to the school,
I met a number of the students in uniforms of cotton drill and they all
entered this gate. Some of them were taller than I and looked much
stronger. When I thought of teaching fellows of this ilk, I was
impressed with a queer sort of uneasiness. My card was taken to the
principal, to whose room I was ushered at once. With scant mustache,
dark-skinned and big-eyed, the principal was a man who looked like a
badger. He studiously assumed an air of superiority, and saying he would
like to see me do my best, handed the note of appointment, stamped big,
in a solemn manner. This note I threw away into the sea on my way back
to Tokyo. He said he would introduce me to all my fellow teachers, and I
was to show to each one of them the note of appointment. What a bother!
It would be far better to stick this note up in the teachers' room for
three days instead of going through such a monkey process.
The teachers would not be all in the room until the bugle for the first
hour was sounded. There was plenty of time. The principal took out his
watch, and saying that he would acquaint me particularly with the school
by-and-bye, he would only furnish me now with general matters, and
started a long lecture on the spirit of education. For a while I
listened to him with my mind half away somewhere else, but about half
way through his lecture, I began to realize that I should soon be in a
bad fix. I could not do, by any means, all he expected of me. He
expected that I should make myself an example to the students, should
become an object of admiration for the whole school or should exert my
moral influence, besides teaching technical knowledge in order to
become a real educator, or something ridiculously high-sounding. No man
with such admirable qualities would come so far away for only 40 yen a
month! Men are generally alike. If one gets excited, one is liable to
fight, I thought, but if things are to be kept on in the way the
principal says, I could hardly open my mouth to utter anything, nor take
a stroll around the place. If they wanted me to fill such an onerous
post, they should have told all that before. I hate to tell a lie; I
would give it up as having been cheated, and get out of this mess like a
man there and then. I had only about 9 yen left in my pocket after
tipping the hotel 5 yen. Nine yen would not take me back to Tokyo. I had
better not have tipped the hotel; what a pity! However, I would be able
to manage it somehow. I considered it better to run short in my return
expenses than to tell a lie.
"I cannot do it the way you want me to. I return this appointment."
I shoved back the note. The principal winked his badger-like eyes and
gazed at me. Then he said;
"What I have said just now is what I desire of you. I know well that you
cannot do all I want, So don't worry."
And he laughed. If he knew it so well already, what on earth did he
scare me for?
Meanwhile the bugle sounded, being followed by bustling noises in the
direction of the class rooms. All the teachers would be now ready, I was
told, and I followed the principal to the teachers' room. In a spacious
rectangular room, they sat each before a table lined along the walls.
When I entered the room, they all glanced at me as if by previous
agreement. Did they think my face was for a show? Then, as per
instructions, I introduced myself and showed the note to each one of
them. Most of them left their chairs and made a slight bow of
acknowledgment. But some of the more painfully polite took the note and
read it and respectfully returned it to me, just like the cheap
performances at a rural show! When I came to the fifteenth, who was the
teacher of physical training, I became impatient at repeating the same
old thing so often. The other side had to do it only once, but my side
had to do it fifteen times. They ought to have had some sympathy.
Among those I met in the room there was Mr. Blank who was head teacher.
Said he was a Bachelor of Arts. I suppose he was a great man since he
was a graduate from Imperial University and had such a title. He talked
in a strangely effeminate voice like a woman. But what surprised me most
was that he wore a flannel shirt. However thin it might be, flannel is
flannel and must have been pretty warm at that time of the year. What
painstaking dress is required which will be becoming to a B.A.! And it
was a red shirt; wouldn't that kill you! I heard afterwards that he
wears a red shirt all the year round. What a strange affliction!
According to his own explanation, he has his shirts made to order for
the sake of his health as the red color is beneficial to the physical
condition. Unnecessary worry, this, for that being the case, he should
have had his coat and hakama also in red. And there was one Mr. Koga,
teacher of English, whose complexion was very pale. Pale-faced people
are usually thin, but this man was pale and fat. When I was attending
grammar school, there was one Tami Asai in our class, and his father was
just as pale as this Koga. Asai was a farmer, and I asked Kiyo if one's
face would become pale if he took up farming. Kiyo said it was not so;
Asai ate always Hubbard squash of "uranari" [2] and that was the reason.
Thereafter when I saw any man pale and fat, I took it for granted that
it was the result of his having eaten too much of squash of "uranari."
This English teacher was surely subsisting upon squash. However, what
the meaning of "uranari" is, I do not know. I asked Kiyo once, but she
only laughed. Probably she did not know. Among the teachers of
mathematics, there was one named Hotta. This was a fellow of massive
body, with hair closely cropped. He looked like one of the old-time
devilish priests who made the Eizan temple famous. I showed him the note
politely, but he did not even look at it, and blurted out;
"You're the man newly appointed, eh? Come and see me sometime,
ha, ha, ha!"
[Footnote 2: Means the last crop.]
Devil take his "Ha, ha, ha!" Who would go to see a fellow so void of the
sense of common decency! I gave this priest from this time the nickname
of Porcupine.
The Confucian teacher was strict in his manner as becoming to his
profession. "Arrived yesterday? You must be tired. Start teaching
already? Working hard, indeed!"--and so on. He was an old man, quite
sociable and talkative.
The teacher of drawing was altogether like a cheap actor. He wore a
thin, flappy haori of sukiya, and, toying with a fan, he giggled; "Where
from? eh? Tokyo? Glad to hear that. You make another of our group. I'm a
Tokyo kid myself."
If such a fellow prided himself on being a Tokyo kid, I wished I had
never been born in Tokyo. I might go on writing about each one of
them, for there are many, but I stop here otherwise there will be no
end to it.
When my formal introduction was over, the principal said that I might go
for the day, but I should make arrangements as to the class hours, etc.,
with the head teacher of mathematics and begin teaching from the day
after the morrow. Asked who was the head teacher of mathematics, I found
that he was no other than that Porcupine. Holy smokes! was I to serve
under him? I was disappointed.
"Say, where are you stopping? Yamashiro-ya? Well, I'll come and
talk it over."
So saying, Porcupine, chalk in hand, left the room to his class. That
was rather humiliating for a head-teacher to come over and see his
subordinate, but it was better than to call me over to him.
After leaving the school, I thought of returning straight to the hotel,
but as there was nothing to do, I decided to take in a little of the
town, and started walking about following my nose. I saw prefectural
building; it was an old structure of the last century. Also I saw the
barracks; they were less imposing than those of the Azabu Regiment,
Tokyo. I passed through the main street. The width of the street is
about one half that of Kagurazaka, and its aspect is inferior. What
about a castle-town of 250,000-koku Lord! Pity the fellows who get
swell-headed in such a place as a castle-town!
While I walked about musing like this, I found myself in front of
Yamashiro-ya. The town was much narrower than I had been led to believe.
"I think I have seen nearly all. Guess I'll return and eat." And I
entered the gate. The mistress of the hotel who was sitting at the
counter, jumped out of her place at my appearance and with "Are you
back, Sire!" scraped the floor with her forehead. When I took my shoes
off and stepped inside, the maid took me to an upstairs room that had
became vacant. It was a front room of 15 mats (about 90 square feet). I
had never before lived in so splendid a room as this. As it was quite
uncertain when I should again be able to occupy such a room in future, I
took off my European dress, and with only a single Japanese summer coat
on, sprawled in the centre of the room in the shape of the Japanese
letter "big" (arms stretched out and legs spread wide[D]). I found it
very refreshing.
After luncheon I at once wrote a letter to Kiyo. I hate most to write
letters because I am poor at sentence-making and also poor in my stock
of words. Neither did I have any place to which to address my letters.
However, Kiyo might be getting anxious. It would not do to let her worry
lest she think the steamer which I boarded had been wrecked and I was
drowned,--so I braced up and wrote a long one. The body of the letter
was as follows:
  "Arrived yesterday. A dull place. Am sleeping in a room of 15 mats.
  Tipped the hotel five yen as tea money. The house-wife of the hotel
  scraped the floor with her forehead. Couldn't sleep last night.
  Dreamed Kiyo eat sasa-ame together with the bamboo-leaf wrappers. Will
  return next summer. Went to the school to-day, and nicknamed all the
  fellows. 'Badger' for the principal, 'Red Shirt' for the head-teacher,
  'Hubbard Squash' for the teacher of English, 'Porcupine' the teacher
  of mathematics and 'Clown' for that of drawing. Will write you many
  other things soon. Good bye."
When I finished writing the letter, I felt better and sleepy. So I slept
in the centre of the room, as I had done before, in the letter "big"
shape ([D]). No dream this time, and I had a sound sleep.
"Is this the room?"--a loud voice was heard,--a voice which woke me up,
and Porcupine entered.
"How do you do? What you have to do in the school----" he began talking
shop as soon as I got up and rattled me much. On learning my duties in
the school, there seemed to be no difficulty, and I decided to accept.
If only such were what was expected of me, I would not be surprised were
I told to start not only two days hence but even from the following day.
The talk on business over, Porcupine said that he did not think it was
my intention to stay in such a hotel all the time, that he would find a
room for me in a good boarding house, and that I should move.
"They wouldn't take in another from anybody else but I can do it
right away. The sooner the better. Go and look at the room to-day,
move tomorrow and start teaching from the next day. That'll be all
nice and settled."
He seemed satisfied by arranging all by himself. Indeed, I should not be
able to occupy such a room for long. I might have to blow in all of my
salary for the hotel bill and yet be short of squaring it. It was pity
to leave the hotel so soon after I had just shone with a 5-yen tip.
However, it being decidedly convenient to move and get settled early if
I had to move at all, I asked Porcupine to get that room for me. He told
me then to come over with him and see the house at any rate, and I did.
The house was situated mid-way up a hill at the end of the town, and was
a quiet. The boss was said to be a dealer in antique curios, called
Ikagin, and his wife was about four years his senior. I learned the
English word "witch" when I was in middle school, and this woman looked
exactly like one. But as she was another man's wife, what did I care if
she was a witch. Finally I decided to live in the house from the next
day. On our way back Porcupine treated me to a cup of ice-water. When I
first met him in the school, I thought him a disgustingly overbearing
fellow, but judging by the way he had looked after me so far, he
appeared not so bad after all. Only he seemed, like me, impatient by
nature and of quick-temper. I heard afterward that he was liked most by
all the students in the school.
CHAPTER III.
My teaching began at last. When I entered the class-room and stepped
upon the platform for the first time, I felt somewhat strange. While
lecturing, I wondered if a fellow like me could keep up the profession
of public instructor. The students were noisy. Once in a while, they
would holler "Teacher!" "Teacher,"--it was "going some." I had been
calling others "teacher" every day so far, in the school of physics, but
in calling others "teacher" and being called one, there is a wide gap of
difference. It made me feel as if some one was tickling my soles. I am
not a sneakish fellow, nor a coward; only--it's a pity--I lack audacity.
If one calls me "teacher" aloud, it gives me a shock similar to that of
hearing the noon-gun in Marunouchi when I was hungry. The first hour
passed away in a dashing manner. And it passed away without encountering
any knotty questions. As I returned to the teachers' room, Porcupine
asked me how it was. I simply answered "well," and he seemed satisfied.
When I left the teachers' room, chalk in hand, for the second hour
class, I felt as if I was invading the enemy's territory. On entering
the room, I found the students for this hour were all big fellows. I am
a Tokyo kid, delicately built and small, and did not appear very
impressive even in my elevated position. If it comes to a scraping, I
can hold my own even with wrestlers, but I had no means of appearing
awe-inspiring[E], merely by the aid of my tongue, to so many as forty
such big chaps before me. Believing, however, that it would set a bad
precedent to show these country fellows any weakness, I lectured rather
loudly and in brusque tone. During the first part the students were
taken aback and listened literally with their mouths open. "That's one
on you!" I thought. Elated by my success, I kept on in this tone, when
one who looked the strongest, sitting in the middle of the front row,
stood up suddenly, and called "Teacher!" There it goes!--I thought, and
asked him what it was.
"A-ah sa-ay, you talk too quick. A-ah ca-an't you make it a leetle slow?
A-ah?" "A-ah ca-an't you?" "A-ah?" was altogether dull.
"If I talk too fast, I'll make it slow, but I'm a Tokyo fellow, and
can't talk the way you do. If you don't understand it, better wait
until you do."
So I answered him. In this way the second hour was closed better than I
had expected. Only, as I was about to leave the class, one of the
students asked me, "A-ah say, won't you please do them for me?" and
showed me some problems in geometry which I was sure I could not solve.
This proved to be somewhat a damper on me. But, helpless, I told him I
could not make them out, and telling him that I would show him how next
time, hastily got out of the room. And all of them raised "Whee--ee!"
Some of them were heard saying "He doesn't know much." Don't take a
teacher for an encyclopaedia! If I could work out such hard questions as
these easily, I would not be in such a backwoods town for forty yen a
month. I returned to the teachers' room.
"How was it this time?" asked Porcupine. I said "Umh." But not satisfied
with "Umh" only, I added that all the students in this school were
boneheads. He put up a whimsical face.
The third and the fourth hour and the first hour in the afternoon were
more or less the same. In all the classes I attended, I made some kind
of blunder. I realised that the profession of teaching not quite so easy
a calling as might have appeared. My teaching for the day was finished
but I could not get away. I had to wait alone until three o'clock. I
understood that at three o'clock the students of my classes would finish
cleaning up the rooms and report to me, whereupon I would go over the
rooms. Then I would run through the students' roll, and then be free to
go home. Outrageous, indeed, to keep on chained to the school, staring
at the empty space when he had nothing more to do, even though he was
"bought" by a salary! Other fellow teachers, however, meekly submitted
to the regulation, and believing it not well for me,--a new comer--to
fuss about it, I stood it. On my way home, I appealed to Porcupine as to
the absurdity of keeping me there till three o'clock regardless of my
having nothing to do in the school. He said "Yes" and laughed. But he
became serious and in an advisory manner told me not to make many
complaints about the school.
"Talk to me only, if you want to. There are some queer guys around."
As we parted at the next corner, I did not have time to hear more from
him.
On reaching my room, the boss of the house came to me saying, "Let me
serve you tea." I expected he was going to treat me to some good tea
since he said "Let me serve you," but he simply made himself at home
and drank my own tea. Judging by this, I thought he might be
practising "Let me serve you" during my absence. The boss said that he
was fond of antique drawings and curios and finally had decided to
start in that business.
"You look like one quite taken about art. Suppose you begin patronizing
my business just for fun as er--connoisseur of art?"
It was the least expected kind of solicitation. Two years ago, I went to
the Imperial Hotel (Tokyo) on an errand, and I was taken for a
locksmith. When I went to see the Daibutsu at Kamakura, haying wrapped
up myself from head to toe with a blanket, a rikisha man addressed me as
"Gov'ner." I have been mistaken on many occasions for as many things,
but none so far has counted on me as a probable connoisseur of art. One
should know better by my appearance. Any one who aspires to be a patron
of art is usually pictured,--you may see in any drawing,--with either a
hood on his head, or carrying a tanzaku[3] in his hand. The fellow who
calls me a connoisseur of art and pretends to mean it, may be surely as
crooked as a dog's hind legs. I told him I did not like such art-stuff,
which is usually favored by retired people. He laughed, and remarking
that that nobody liked it at first, but once in it, will find it so
fascinating that he will hardly get over it, served tea for himself and
drank it in a grotesque manner. I may say that I had asked him the night
before to buy some tea for me, but I did not like such a bitter, heavy
kind. One swallow seemed to act right on my stomach. I told him to buy a
kind not so bitter as that, and he answered "All right, Sir," and drank
another cup. The fellow seemed never to know of having enough of
anything so long as it was another man's. After he left the room, I
prepared for the morrow and went to bed.
[Footnote 3: A tanzaku is a long, narrow strip of stiff paper on which a
Japanese poem is written.]
Everyday thereafter I attended at the school and worked as per
regulations. Every day on my return, the boss came to my room with the
same old "Let me serve you tea." In about a week I understood the school
in a general way, and had my own idea as to the personality of the boss
and his wife. I heard from one of my fellow teachers that the first week
to one month after the receipt of the appointment worried them most as
to whether they had been favorably received among the students. I never
felt anything on that score. Blunders in the class room once in a while
caused me chagrin, but in about half an hour everything would clear out
of my head. I am a fellow who, by nature, can't be worrying long
about[F] anything even if I try to. I was absolutely indifferent as how
my blunders in the class room affected the students, or how much further
they affected the principal or the head-teacher. As I mentioned before,
I am not a fellow of much audacity to speak of, but I am quick to give
up anything when I see its finish.
I had resolved to go elsewhere at once if the school did not suit me. In
consequence, neither Badger nor Red Shirt wielded any influence over me.
And still less did I feel like coaxing or coddling the youngsters in the
class room.
So far it was O.K. with the school, but not so easy as that at my
boarding house. I could have stood it if it had been only the boss
coming to my room after my tea. But he would fetch many things to my
room. First time he brought in seals.[4] He displayed about ten of them
before me and persuaded me to buy them for three yen, which was very
cheap, he said. Did he take me for a third rate painter making a round
of the country? I told him I did not want them. Next time he brought in
a panel picture of flowers and birds, drawn by one Kazan or somebody. He
hung it against the wall of the alcove and asked me if it was not well
done, and I echoed it looked well done. Then he started lecturing about
Kazan, that there are two Kazans, one is Kazan something and the other
is Kazan anything, and that this picture was the work of that Kazan
something. After this nonsensical lecture, he insisted that he would
make it fifteen yen for me to buy it. I declined the offer saying that I
was shy of the money.
[Footnote 4: Artists have several seals of stone with which to stamp on
the picture they draw as a guarantee of their personal work or for
identification. The shape and kind of seals are quite a hobby among
artists, and sales or exchange are of common occurrence.]
"You can pay any time." He was insistent. I settled him by telling him
of my having no intention of purchasing it even if I had the necessary
money. Again next time, he yanked in a big writing stone slab about the
size of a ridge-tile.
"This is a tankei,"[5] he said. As he "tankeied" two or three times, I
asked for fun what was a tankei. Right away he commenced lecturing on
the subject. "There are the upper, the middle and the lower stratum in
tankei," he said. "Most of tankei slabs to-day are made from the upper
stratum," he continued, "but this one is surely from the middle
stratum. Look at this 'gan.'[6] 'Tis certainly rare to have three
'gans' like this. The ink-cake grates smoothly on it. Try it,
sir,"--and he pushed it towards me. I asked him how much, and he
answered that on account of its owner having brought it from China and
wishing to sell if as soon as possible, he would make it very cheap,
that I could have it for thirty yen. I was sure he was a fool. I seemed
to be able to get through the school somehow, but I would soon give out
if this "curio siege" kept on long.
[Footnote 5: Tankei is the name of a place in China where a certain kind
of stone suitable for writing purposes was produced.]
[Footnote 6: "Gan" may be understood as a kind of natural mark on the
stone peculiar to the stone from Tankei.]
Shortly afterwards, I began to get sick of the school. One certain
night, while I was strolling about a street named Omachi, I happened to
notice a sign of noodles below of which was annotated "Tokyo" in the
house next to the post office. I am very fond of noodles. While I was in
Tokyo, if I passed by a noodle house and smelled the seasoning spices, I
felt uncontrollable temptation to go inside at any cost. Up to this time
I had forgotten the noodle on account of mathematics and antique curios,
but since I had seen thus the sign of noodles, I could hardly pass it by
unnoticed. So availing myself of this opportunity, I went in. It was not
quite up to what I had judged by the sign. Since it claimed to follow
the Tokyo style, they should have tidied up a little bit about the room.
They did not either know Tokyo or have the means,--I did not know which,
but the room was miserably dirty. The floor-mats had all seen better
days and felt shaggy with sandy dust. The sootcovered walls defied the
blackest black. The ceiling was not only smoked by the lamp black, but
was so low as to force one involuntarily bend down his neck. Only the
price-list, on which was glaringly written "Noodles" and which was
pasted on the wall, was entirely new. I was certain that they bought an
old house and opened the business just two or three days before. At the
head of the price-list appeared "tempura" (noodles served with shrimp
fried in batter).
"Say, fetch me some tempura," I ordered in a loud voice. Then three
fellows who had been making a chewing noise together in a corner, looked
in my direction. As the room was dark I did not notice them at first.
But when we looked at each other, I found them all to be boys in our
school. They "how d'ye do'd" me and I acknowledged it. That night,
having come across the noodle after so long a time, it tasted so fine
that I ate four bowls.
The next day as I entered the class room quite unconcernedly, I saw on
the black board written in letters so large as to take up the whole
space; "Professor Tempura." The boys all glanced at my face and made
merry hee-haws at my cost. It was so absurd that I asked them if it was
in any way funny for me to eat tempura noodle. Thereupon one of them
said,--"But four bowls is too much." What did they care if I ate four
bowls or five as long as I paid it with my own money,--and speedily
finishing up my class, I returned to the teachers' room. After ten
minutes' recess, I went to the next class, and there on the black board
was newly written quite as large as before; "Four bowls of tempura
noodles, but don't laugh."
The first one did not arouse any ill-temper in me, but this time it made
me feel irritating mad. A joke carried too far becomes mischievous. It
is like the undue jealousy of some women who, like coal, look black and
suggest flames. Nobody likes it. These country simpletons, unable to
differentiate upon so delicate a boundary, would seem to be bent on
pushing everything to the limit. As they lived in such a narrow town
where one has no more to see if he goes on strolling about for one hour,
and as they were capable of doing nothing better, they were trumpeting
aloud this tempura incident in quite as serious a manner as the
Russo-Japanese war. What a bunch of miserable pups! It is because they
are raised in this fashion from their boyhood that there are many punies
who, like the dwarf maple tree in the flower pot, mature gnarled and
twisted. I have no objection to laugh myself with others over innocent
jokes. But how's this? Boys as they are, they showed a "poisonous
temper." Silently erasing off "tempura" from the board, I questioned
them if they thought such mischief interesting, that this was a cowardly
joke and if they knew the meaning of "cowardice." Some of them answered
that to get angry on being laughed at over one's own doing, was
cowardice. What made them so disgusting as this? I pitied myself for
coming from far off Tokyo to teach such a lot.
"Keep your mouth shut, and study hard," I snapped, and started the
class. In the next class again there was written: "When one eats tempura
noodles it makes him drawl nonsense." There seemed no end to it. I was
thoroughly aroused with anger, and declaring that I would not teach such
sassies, went home straight. The boys were glad of having an unexpected
holiday, so I heard. When things had come to this pass, the antique
curious seemed far more preferable to the school.
My return home and sleep over night greatly rounded off my rugged temper
over the tempura affair. I went to the school, and they were there also.
I could not tell what was what. The three days thereafter were pacific,
and on the night of the fourth day, I went to a suburb called Sumida and
ate "dango" (small balls made of glutinous rice, dressed with
sugar-paste). Sumida is a town where there are restaurants, hot-springs
bath houses and a park, and in addition, the "tenderloin." The dango
shop where I went was near the entrance to the tenderloin, and as the
dango served there was widely known for its nice taste, I dropped in on
my way back from my bath. As I did not meet any students this time, I
thought nobody knew of it, but when I entered the first hour class next
day, I found written on the black board; "Two dishes of dango--7 sen."
It is true that I ate two dishes and paid seven sen. Troublesome kids! I
declare. I expected with certainty that there would be something at the
second hour, and there it was; "The dango in the tenderloin taste fine."
Stupid wretches!
No sooner I thought, the dango incident closed than the red towel became
the topic for widespread gossip. Inquiry as to the story revealed it to
be something unusually absurd. Since, my arrival here, I had made it a
part of my routine to take in the hot springs bath every day. While
there was nothing in this town which compared favorably with Tokyo, the
hot springs were worthy of praise. So long as I was in the town, I
decided that I would have a dip every day, and went there walking,
partly for physical exercise, before my supper. And whenever I went
there I used to carry a large-size European towel dangling from my hand.
Added to somewhat reddish color the towel had acquired by its having
been soaked in the hot-springs, the red color on its border, which was
not fast enough, streaked about so that the towel now looked as if it
were dyed red. This towel hung down from my hand on both ways whether
afoot or riding in the train. For this reason, the students nicknamed me
Red Towel. Honest, it is exasperating to live in a little town.
There is some more. The bath house I patronized was a newly built
three-story house, and for the patrons of the first class the house
provided a bath-robe, in addition to an attendant, and the cost was only
eight sen. On top of that, a maid would serve tea in a regular polite
fashion. I always paid the first class. Then those gossipy spotters
started saying that for one who made only forty yen a month to take a
first class bath every day was extravagant. Why the devil should they
care? It was none of their business.
There is still some more. The bath-tub,--or the tank in this case,--was
built of granite, and measured about thirty square feet. Usually there
were thirteen or fourteen people in the tank, but sometimes there was
none. As the water came up clear to the breast, I enjoyed, for athletic
purposes, swimming in the tank. I delighted in swimming in this